hello and welcome to topcast episode 57
this is a bonus episode just for easter
2021.
it was first released to my generous
patreons a week early but
now it is available everywhere if you'd
like to support the podcast and get
earlier access to podcasts
like this one consider subscribing at
patreon
if you simply do a google search for my
name brett hall
or for toccast along with patreon that's
patreon p-a-t-r-e-o-n
then you will find a way to support me
and my ongoing efforts here
this podcast was recorded at the request
of one of my patreons
it's all about existential risk so it's
called
and how to think about existential risk
in the context of a rational but
critical world view and especially an
optimistic world view
as you will hear the quality is a little
bit different to my other podcasts in
large part
because i'm outside and so you can hear
the sounds of the sydney suburbs
and it is quite unrehearsed i also hope
it's reasonably good humid on such a
serious topic
but without further ado here are my
thoughts on existential risk
one of my patreon subscribers some
months ago now asked me to speak about
existential risk and i've been unable to
get around to doing that until now
so this is largely off the cuff
with my ideas about how to think
about existential risk existential risk
is
something that certain scientists are
extremely
interested in trying to explain to the
rest of us
about how there won't merely be
problems that are going to distract
governments and people but there are
going to be problems which
could wipe out all of civilization the
entirety of humanity
and if we want to think seriously about
this we're going to have to
calculate the likelihood of these things
occurring
when we're talking about existential
risk what we mean is
the end to existence to a large extent
the
end of the existence of humanity so
we're talking about the
biggest possible problems that we can
conceive of
we're trying to understand analyze and
then predict
the probability that these things are
actually going to wipe us out at some
point in the future
so what things appear in this category
or one thing that appears in this
category
is something called a super volcano
there is a super volcano so we are told
geologically lurking beneath yellowstone
national park in the united states and
this thing is so vast
that should it erupt in the way in which
some volcanologists think that it may
one day
it could lead to an outgassing event in
other words
huge amounts of gas like carbon dioxide
and various other noxious
volatiles not to mention the dust and
ash this sort of thing kicks up into the
atmosphere
that that volcano will be of such a
magnitude
that it will blot out the sun for some
time and this could lead to
global catastrophe it could lead to crop
failure in particular so that's one
thing that might happen
we could have agriculture suffering
across the entire planet
not only agriculture suffering but the
vegetation that wild animals eat could
suffer as well
and indeed the aquatic environment might
suffer because there won't be enough
light getting down to the oceans where
the algae is producing food for the fish
to eat
that could happen there's certain other
apocalyptic scenarios from such a
volcanic event like
huge molten balls of rock being thrown
up into the air
and coming back down and setting ablaze
large areas of forest
this might happen as well and so that is
only going to exacerbate this problem
this could be an existential threat to
human civilization
and even if it didn't kill everyone out
right it could cause such disruption to
the economy
that that could lead to wars and it
could precipitate something
that eventually leads to a huge decline
in
global progress global well-being and
perhaps global population
so how could you calculate the
probability of something like this
happening
well you look through the geologic
record you look at what has
hitherto happened in the past under
naturally occurring events when
we think about whenever volcanoes have
gone off we can just simply look at the
rocks
rock strata are a wonderful record of
being able to preserve precisely what
was going on in the atmosphere at any
point in the past
we know when there have been huge
volcanic eruptions because
we can see the ash deposits the the
remnants of those volcanoes fall down to
earth and then
gradually get compacted between layers
of different rock
over time over millions of years so the
probability calculation on this account
is a pretty straightforward exercise you
simply you simply look for the evidence
you look for
how frequently volcanoes have occurred
in the past and it might very well be
the case and indeed it is the case
that a planet like the earth being
geologically active becomes
less geologically active over time over
the
time scale of millions hundreds of
millions billions of years there are
good
geophysical reasons for this the earth
is gradually
cooling over time so in fact the earth
is becoming geologically more stable
over time the number of
huge volcanic eruptions is decreasing
but that aside
we do know that volcanoes will continue
to erupt
and indeed some big volcanoes we would
expect to erupt bigger than they have in
the
history of any human that currently
alive so apparently we can do
some sort of probability we can make
some sort of
calculation about when the next volcano
is going to happen
and looking in the past we can see there
have been certain volcanoes that have
been so huge
that they have caused the extinction of
entire species and vast numbers of
species
that i think it's relatively well known
in the
in the geology paleontology astrophysics
community
that soon after the kt event the
the event that wiped out the dinosaurs
this was the asteroid that crashed in
the yucatan peninsula
that soon after that there were large
volcanic eruptions
sometime within a million years i think
of that of that kt event
it's and it's caused debates in the
community of geologists and
paleontologists about
what really was either the approximate
or the ultimate cause of the demise of
the dinosaurs was it indeed
that asteroid crashing down to the earth
and kicking up a whole bunch of dust
into the atmosphere was that the thing
that wiped out the dinosaurs because the
vegetation died
or was it the fact that that asteroid
actually precipitated a whole bunch
of different volcanic eruptions around
the world
and it was that the volcanic eruptions
that actually caused the demise of the
dinosaurs
i think the consensus now is it was the
asteroid that was directly responsible
for the extinction of dinosaurs but it's
interesting that
serious scientists did indeed come up
with the idea that volcanoes could have
could have wiped out the dinosaurs so
volcanoes are in that category of
existential threat to life on earth
what else might we put here well
asteroids as we just mentioned
it has certainly been the case over the
geological cosmological history of the
universe
and history of the planet obviously that
many many species have been wiped out
simultaneously by asteroid collisions
in fact there's something like five or
six so-called mass extinction events
many of these may have been caused by
asteroids they may also have been caused
by
other cosmological events one of my
favorite examples is of course the
possibility
that just perhaps it was a supernova
explosion
that wiped out life on earth i've often
thought that of all the disaster movies
that have so far been made disaster
movies about volcanoes going off or
disaster movies about a sudden rapid
climate change or
earthquakes or name the disaster and you
will have a disaster movie about it but
as far as i know
we don't have a disaster movie yet about
supernovae going off somewhere nearby
because if a supernova went off
somewhere nearby right now well when i
say right now
if the explosion reached us right now
what would happen
depending upon the intensity of that
supernova explosion
you would have irradiation on one side
of the planet and perhaps this would
cause severe disruption to the
atmosphere
but essentially large and largely
speaking the people on the other side of
the planet not facing the supernova
explosion
wouldn't be affected immediately but
they would gradually come to learn that
as the earth rotates
the supernova radiation will begin to
exterminate
things that came within sight of the
supernova so it could very well be the
case for example
that if australia was facing the
direction of the supernova blast that
everyone in australia and on that side
of the planet
would be wiped out by the supernova
explosion but the frightening thing
would be for the people on the other
side of the planet let's say in the
united states
trying to phone or zoom with their
friends they would find that no one in
the country of australia would be
answering because we would have been
almost immediately exterminated by the
supernova depending upon the conditions
who knows what this supernova is like
but
for argument's sake this is a
possibility that you could have people
wiped out on one side of the planet and
the other side of the planet
these people would have time to dig deep
beneath the earth
and to try and escape from the supernova
radiation and supernova radiation
would probably only last for hours to
days perhaps so
in theory they could go beneath the
surface of the earth escape from the
worst effects
but while meantime the people on the
other side of the planet would have been
largely exterminated unless they
happened to already be underground or
perhaps inside i'm not sure but this is
my idea for a disaster
movie but how do we think about the
probability the existential threat of
supernovas well we can do
we we can rely upon the astrophysical
knowledge of the community of
astronomers out there
and we kind of have a good idea of the
stability of stars that we can
see and there are some unstable stars
there are some stars that are
large red giants there are some stars
that are variable stars and we can see
most of these and we understand the
astrophysical processes
we understand well what it takes for a
star to explode in a supernova blast
such that the amount of radiation
reaching the earth would be a threat
to life here on earth and there is
nothing there is no star
within the minimum radius required that
is likely to explode anytime within the
next
few hundred thousand years that we need
to be worried about
all the stars that are relatively close
to the earth uh within the danger zone
so to speak
are not really near the point where
they're about to explode anytime soon
within the lifetime of anyone alive
or the lifetime of anyone's
grandchildren who are alive now what
about asteroids well the interesting
thing about asteroids is they used to
strike the earth far more frequently
than what they do today now why is that
well the reason is the planets as they
orbit the sun hoover up or vacuum up
all the debris in their orbit so along
the orbit at the earth takes
which is in between venus and mars
obviously once upon a time there were
lots and lots of rocks lots
of debris lots of asteroids out there
but they've long since been attracted to
the earth and have crashed into the
earth there was this period
billions of years ago called the late
heavy bombardment
and it's just like it sounds the earth
was bombarded by a huge asteroid
crashing into the earth
and this sterilized the surface of the
planet pretty much but since then so
many of the asteroids have either been
shepherded into that region between mars
and jupiter into the asteroid belt
and they tend not to leave that asteroid
belt they don't tend to be pushed
towards the earth it can happen it
doesn't happen frequently
the other place to find asteroids apart
from the asteroid belt is called the
kuiper belt the kuiper belt's
out beyond the orbit of newt um out
beyond the orbit of neptune
now asteroids could be kicked out of
their orbits from there and head towards
the earth as well and then of course
going out further beyond the kuiper belt
we have the
mysterious oort cloud the alt cloud is
the place in the solar system the very
boundaries of the solar system
it certainly is part of the solar system
because it's gravitationally bound to
the sun which makes it part of the solar
system
but out there we have rocky icy bodies
which when they come towards the sun
end up being comets and so they could
crash into the earth as well
and we know that this has happened in
the past and we know that these objects
are still out there
and so you can kind of do some kind of
calculation about the frequency with
which
objects like this come towards the earth
and potentially
intersect with the earth's orbit and how
often out of all those intersections
with the earth's all but they actually
intersect with the earth itself
causing a mass extinction event now of
all the ways of considering existential
risk i do like
analysis of the asteroid question
because
absent people and this is the theme in
the work of david deutsch and in my
attempts to explain it
absent people we can do these kind of
calculations the frequency with which
asteroids intersect with the earth crash
into the earth
and wipe out some huge proportion of the
life on earth
for example at the time of the dinosaurs
62 million years ago
when the asteroid crashed in the
southern part of mexico in the yucatan
peninsula
and that we know caused the extinction
of the dinosaurs and a whole bunch of
other species as well and related
species
it was an extinction level event that
kind of asteroid would be an existential
threat
but is such an asteroid an existential
threat today
well it would be if we didn't find out
about it before it crashed into the
earth but we do
have people who are interested in
searching for such asteroids
nasa has programs searching scanning the
skies for asteroids for
for dangerous asteroids which might
crash into the earth
so can we put a number a probability you
know one in the thousand
of this happening within the next
century of a huge asteroid coming
and wiping out all life on earth well we
can certainly put a number
on the probability that such an asteroid
could intersect with the point at which
the earth is on its orbit as it goes
around the sun
but let's say such a calculation is done
where we find for example that a
particular asteroid is located
and this asteroid is large let's say
it's 10 kilometers across that's large
by
asteroids that crash into the earth
terms and let's say we picked a number
one in 100 and that one in 100 was the
chance that the asteroid was going to
crash
into the earth 100 years from now that's
quite a high probability
and given the potential effects of such
an asteroid crashing into the earth
namely
the wiping out of civilization a 10
kilometer asteroid
rushing at 10 times the speed of a
bullet straight into the earth is going
to do untold damage
if it hits the oceans it's going to
create tsunamis around the entire world
if it hits a particular country on land
it's going to kick up dust either way
it's going to kick up dust
including large amounts of molten or
fiery rock
which will come crashing down onto the
forest of the world setting them ablaze
and so simultaneously we'll have forest
fires all over the earth caused by
the fallout from such an asteroid and
the cloud of dust that will be kicked up
into the atmosphere
will blot out the sun for perhaps some
weeks destroying
much of the plant life on earth and
certainly much of the food
for animals and for people so if we had
such a probability event a one in 100
chance
given the fact that it could potentially
wipe out all of civilization
we would want to do something about that
and if we had a 100 year
lead in time we would start doing things
about that and probably the first thing
we would do is we'd want to refine the
probability
we'd have more astrophysicists with
better telescopes
refining the probability because you
need to be able to do
extra precise calculations in order to
refine that probability and by refine
that probability i mean find out if it
really is one in 100
or something different now if after 20
years we'd built different telescopes
and we'd built better supercomputers and
we engaged the help of
ever brighter astrophysicists to come up
with a new calculation
and if we found to our relative horror
that in fact the probability wasn't one
in 100
but it was one in three of this asteroid
actually
intersecting with the earth then i think
we'd start to take
steps to mitigate the effects and by
mitigate the effects i mean
to push the asteroid off course
our creativity would then begin to
change that probability
and there's all sorts of interesting
ways that engineers and astrophysicists
and
clever people have thought about in
order to push an asteroid out of the way
this is an engineering problem there's
nothing in the laws of physics that says
asteroids can't be pushed out of the way
by human beings it may be difficult
it may be a bit of an engineering
challenge but one can imagine people
like
elon musk and jeff bezos actually
putting rockets up there and just
physically pushing the asteroid out of
the way and you don't have to push the
asteroid very far
and you don't need much rocketry power
in order to push an asteroid out of the
way
because an asteroid isn't being
propelled anywhere all it's doing is
following a particular trajectory
which is affected almost solely by the
gravitation of the sun
it's following an orbit around the sun
and sadly for us that
orbit intersects with the earth's own
orbit at the time when the earth is
actually at the place where
the asteroid is going to intersect with
that orbit indeed
scientists have done calculations where
if you were to simply cover one half of
the asteroid in aluminium foil
or white paint the differential effect
of
sunlight on such an object would be
enough to push the asteroid hither or
this
in such a way that it would no longer
intersect with the orbit of the earth so
there are solutions to this and we know
what these solutions are
and whatever the level of technology
today is going to be vastly greater in
10 years
and if we know there's a one in three
chance in 10 years from now
of the asteroid crashing into the earth
90 years hence then if we wait yet
another 10 years we might find that oh
our calculation of 1 and 3 is different
again it might in fact be
2 in 3. so it seems more and more likely
that indeed this asteroid is going to
crash into the earth
in which case we will have to use our
technology to get up there
to get rockets we'll have a huge global
effort in order to push this thing out
of the way
and that chance would then change it
would no longer be twin three would be
two and three
absent us doing anything but we would do
something
this is the way in which critical
rationalism
and optimism in the style of david
deutsch deals
with existential risks we have to have a
stance of
problem solving we cannot calculate the
probability of things
absent people because people exist and
people actually have
effects in the world this is why many of
us have a little giggle
at things like the doomsday clock the
doomsday clock was
a serious endeavor back invented back in
1947 by atomic scientists who are very
concerned
rightly concerned with global nuclear
war
and so in order to push home the point
to the rest of society that
these weapons were terribly catastrophic
terribly worrisome the damage they could
do could indeed
lead to the collapse of civilization if
they were used
just like conventional weapons were and
so the doomsday clock was
supposed to shock people into realising
how
scary nuclear weapons were how seriously
we should take the threat of nuclear war
and so saying that for example we're at
five minutes to midnight was supposed to
be a measure of
how unseriously government to the world
and other people in the world
were when it when it came to considering
the
seriousness of the threat of nuclear
catastrophe that via
accident or indeed intention governments
of the world
could precipitate a nuclear winter they
could precipitate something
that no one in their right mind would
want to happen
and so this was the seriousness of the
doomsday clock but since then of course
the doomsday clock has been used for
just about
any kind of threat and so all different
threats are now
incorporated into the doomsday clock so
so now scientists get in get up in front
of the cartoonish doomsday clock and
even include things like
climate change climate change which
might wipe us out but in the same way
that it was always people who were in
charge of whether or not
the global nuclear winter was going to
happen after global nuclear war
it is still people that are in charge of
whether or not
we're going to have catastrophic global
climate change
and the scientists and others who set
the doomsday clock
never consider that people's creativity
has a real effect and we should be
optimistic about that so instead of the
minute hand getting ever closer to
midnight it should be getting further
and further away
from midnight and this is why some of us
giggle at it now they're not taking
seriously the notion that people are
becoming more moral
more risk averse we are more willing to
engage in serious solutions to the most
pressing problems
so rather than us getting closer
to global catastrophic climate change we
are getting further away
despite all the political noise despite
the concerns about
whether or not particular governments
are enacting this or that policy we are
gaining the power the knowledge and the
power
to literally change the thermostat of
the planet
people already laugh at certain wealthy
individuals like
bill gates i think was one who suggested
that we put
a kind of aerosol into the atmosphere in
order to reflect some of the sunlight
now this may not be a good idea but at
least in principle
people who are wealthy enough are
thinking about doing this kind of thing
and it might potentially be the case
that one day we have something similar
i wouldn't suggest aerosols because i
don't know that people have done
sufficient scientific work to figure out
what negative effects the aerosol might
have we want of course to have a
solution
which fixes the problem of climate
change without causing as a side effect
a whole bunch of problems that are even
worse than what climate change was
what other kinds of global risk are
there of
existential risk well i've just gone to
the wikipedia page
that is titled global catastrophic risk
which is where you get taken if you do a
google search for existential risk you
end up
at the wikipedia page and there is a
section there on
likelihood and so let me read through
some these are the
estimated probabilities for human
extinction before
2100. now there are a whole bunch of
respectable scientists and philosophers
who make similar calculations now martin
reese's one the great astrophysicist
british cosmologist martin reese who
wrote a book called
on the future prospects for humanity in
2018 which talks about
all the ways in which we might die and
before that in fact he
had our final hour that was back in
2003.
both of these about the potential
for human beings going extinct and so he
makes some calculations
some educated guesses about the
potential for humans being wiped out
through either their own actions
or indeed inactions so we're culpable
either way and i think he's right to say
that we would be
culpable either way but can he make
such a prediction such a probability
assessment now
someone else who speaks in these terms
is of course nick
bostrom and nick bostrom has written
books and papers he
uh he's probably one of the world's
foremost thinkers on this topic of
existential risk and so he's written a
book called
global catastrophic risks that's one of
his books
he has serious academic papers for
example existential risks
analyzing human extinction scenarios
which has been cited by 641 people in
terms of citations
that's pretty serious we might have a
look at that one shortly there are other
books as well
published just recently one by toby ord
that book is called the precipice
existential risk
and the future of humanity now i put all
of these ways of speaking about
existential risk
into the same category as disaster
movies and i think that they sell
really well and people are very excited
about them because it is
thrilling i honestly think it's
emotionally thrilling
to go along to a disaster movie i know i
love it i loved deep impact the movie
all about
an asteroid was it a comet i think it
was a comet comet coming to earth
and literally crashing into the earth
and you get to see the wonderful special
effects
and consider all the ways in which
civilization could be upended
and how impotent people are in the face
of some cosmological event like this
it's fun it's fun
but of course in disaster movies people
fail to solve the problem and often they
fail to solve the problem
because they just don't try hard enough
they just don't put the right effort
into doing
what needs to be done in time because
otherwise there wouldn't be a movie
there wouldn't be much of a movie
if the terrible event didn't actually
happen it would be an anti-climax
but of course in our world we want the
anti-climax we do not want the
end to come so we are going to put in
more effort
than what the people in any disaster
movie ever do and end up failing
now before i get to the example
probabilities from the wikipedia article
let me just skim through nick bostrom's
professional peer-reviewed well-cited
article on this topic and let's just go
through
specific examples of existential risks
so he has different categories of
existential risks that he calls bangs
crunches shrieks and whimpers that is
just a way of him saying how quickly
the extinction event is going to happen
the bang is something that happens
immediately and there's nothing anyone
can do about it it's a huge
explosion across the entirety of the
earth and we don't have enough time to
respond
all the way through to a whimper which
is where some post-human civilization
arises
but involves in a direction that leads
gradually but irrevocably
to either the complete disappearance of
the things we value or to a state where
those things are realised to only a
minuscule degree
of what could have been achieved in
other words what he's hinting at there
is the gradual takeover
of some kind of artificial intelligence
of
humanity and that could happen so slowly
and imperceptibly that by the time we
think
that the ai is a danger it will be too
late for us to do anything about it
nick bostrom is very animated by this
kind of science fiction scenario
but but his particular forms of bangs
these include
uh deliberate misuses of nanotechnology
so nanotechnology which might
itself cause some sort of pandemic some
way of
getting into our bloodstream and
destroying our bodies
nuclear holocaust that favorite of
people
over many decades now the fact that
we're
living in a simulation perhaps and it
gets shut down that could be a bang
event that causes
the end of existence this is a serious
philosophical paper
badly programmed super intelligence
could indeed take over
much more quickly than what people think
genetically engineered
biological agents one category is
something unforeseen and so what he says
about this
this is a this is a serious suggestion
for the way in which
we might all go extinct and we should
consider this very seriously
he says we need a catch-all category it
would be foolish to be confident that we
have already imagined
and anticipated all significant risks
future technological or scientific
developments
may very well reveal novel ways of
destroying the world so that's
interesting and i couldn't agree with
him more there
there could always be something
unforeseen that could wipe us all out
immediately
but of course with any of these claims
about something unforeseen that could
wipe us out all immediately
something unforeseen could happen namely
the creative output of people that could
solve that
thing in ways in which nick bostrom
hasn't thought or which i haven't
thought
but either you can go down the
pessimistic route the
the exciting thrilling way of thinking
that nick bostrom
could be right and we're all going to
die at some point it's a pessimistic way
to live your life
or you could go down an alternative
route where you think yes there are
dangers out there
but people people are grand not exactly
gods
but we share some features of what
traditional gods are like
we do have control over the laws of
nature to a very large extent we're able
to
move matter create knowledge and solve
problems we are not being blown around
like
leaves in the wind we actually have
control what else does nick bostrom have
among his ways in which we might all die
plain old physical disasters so
so so for example a particle accelerator
experiment
might produce something strange and
unforeseen
this too is something that other
physicists have said with the large
hadron collider was switched on
people said well it might create little
black holes which could swallow the
earth
of course the particle physics should
have been talking to the astrophysicists
because
astrophysicists knew that there were
particles of much much higher energy
than anything the lhc the large hadron
collider was producing crashing into the
other
upper atmosphere and have been crashing
into the upper upper atmosphere
ever since the earth began and because
we knew that this
had been going on for billions of years
and hitherto had never created any black
hole
we know that this isn't going to happen
and so nick bostrom simply has the
physics wrong there
there's nothing that a particle
accelerator can do
artificially man-made that already is
not occurring in nature even
within even on the earth in the upper
atmosphere what else do we have on the
list
naturally occurring diseases what if
aids was as contagious as the common
cold this could be this could wipe us
out
finally he gets to asteroid and comet
impacts runaway global warming
resource depletion or ecological
destruction misguided world governments
or other
static social equilibrium stops
technological processes
i agree with him there and in fact i
would say that a lot of
nick bostrom's own solutions to these
questions of global catastrophic risk
in fact involve stasis they involve us
not making further progress because
progress is something
that he regards as being particularly
hazardous
so there's an irony lurking here
and he continues take over by a
transcend a transcending upload i think
he's starting to repeat himself now so
this is more about artificial
intelligence taking over the world oh
another one which is in a separate
category flawed super intelligence i
think that's the same sort of thing
repressive totalitarian global regime
he's really running out of ideas now he
really is repeating himself
something unforeseen again okay he's
really starting to wind down
i'm down into the category which is
labeled whimpers now
um he mentions killed by an
extraterrestrial civilization so that
makes the list as well so we have to
watch out for that
um okay i think that we'll do for now
we'll i'll leave behind
um nick bostrom's long interesting
list of science fiction scenarios or
basically interesting premises i think
that that hollywood producers could do
well
reading through such a list and finding
good directors to
make stories out of those uh all those
ways in which we can die
i'd certainly watch some of those movies
but that's for taking them seriously
in a scientific sense well of course we
should take problems seriously but it's
those
unforeseen ones i'd rather be focused on
and not focused on
by being fixated upon them but focused
on to the extent that it means
we need to have continued scientific
research we need to have continued
open flourishing societies we need to
give ourselves
the best opportunity to be able to
create the knowledge in time when these
unforeseen
things happen so back at wikipedia
we have the estimated probabilities for
human extinction before 2100
and the source for this the source for
this table in wikipedia is
the future of humanity institute in
something published in 2008
and so what they say is the chance of
nuclear terrorism
causing the extinction of human beings
before 2100 the chance of that is
0.03 a natural pandemic
0.05 a nanotechnology accident
0.5 nuclear war one percent
engineered pandemic two percent
all wars including civil wars four
percent
super intelligent ai five percent
molecular nanotechnology weapons 5
and the overall probability of taking
all these things together and somehow
summing them
19 so there's a 19 chance of humans
going extinct before 2100
it's a question that learn looms here
isn't there how do they know
how do they know any of this
so we could probably have a reasonable
way in which we could calculate
the frequency at which asteroids collide
with the earth
and how that frequency has decreased for
good
astrophysical reasons over time we know
the reasons why
the frequency has decreased over time
nonetheless we could indeed calculate
given what we know about the asteroids
that exist in the solar system
what the chance is of an asteroid
crashing into the earth i think the more
scary asteroids of course
are the ones and there's been a recent
example of
asteroids from well outside the solar
system
so goodness knows where these asteroids
are coming from
other solar systems or parts of exploded
stars and so on and so forth traveling
far more quickly at much higher velocity
than anything
within the solar system so if these
things start heading towards the earth
wall that's
that's a bit of a worry i don't know how
you mitigate against those you know some
of these things might have
relativistic speeds you know the you
know something that that is coming from
a supernova traveling you know half the
speed of light
traveling across uh the entire galaxy of
in fact
possibly from another galaxy these are
scary options to consider they could
crash into the earth
uh and and we probably wouldn't see it
coming that would be one of those bang
events
literally a bank that nick bostrom's
talked about but i don't think it's
worth worrying about
i mean if you seriously tried to
calculate the probability of something
like that intersecting with the earth
you'd probably need to wait many times
the lifetime of the universe before an
event like that actually happened
given the size of the universe and the
small size of such an asteroid okay
but asteroids at least we have the
potential of trying to come up with uh
the number of asteroids in the solar
system or indeed
you know in the universe we could
probably have a some sort of estimate of
that
and the the chance of any of those
intersecting with the orbit of the earth
but when it comes to something like
nuclear terrorism putting the number at
0.03 percent how on earth that is done
this is
this is an in-principle impossible
number to use it's an in-principle
impossible
number to calculate why because nuclear
terrorism
is predicated upon bad ideologies bad
ideas
people who have some ridiculous idea
about how perhaps if they were to wipe a
whole bunch of people out
yeah in a nuclear terrorist event
they're going to receive some
metaphysical award you know they're
going to be welcomed into heaven by
the creator of the universe who wants
them to do something like that
now i don't know what the chances of
such ideologies taking hold
on the planet i'd like to think that as
time goes on the number of people
subscribing to such ridiculous ideas
actually decreases over time people
become more enlightened more moral
that's been the
lesson of the history of humanity but i
don't know
if in 10 years that everyone isn't
converted to
some terrible fundamentalist form of
worshiping the great spaghetti monster
and perhaps
these pastafarians as they're called
these pasture fairians become
genocidal and they just want to wipe out
all of humanity
the chance of that happening is not
knowable we don't know because people
are creative and they can
create terrible ideas and those terrible
ideas can
lead to things like terrorist acts and
in
theory those terrorist acts could be so
severe they could involve nuclear
weapons that they could actually
wipe out large portions of humanity but
that one reason to think that that is
not as likely as what people think is
because
the good guys have an advantage the
pastafarians the people who want to
for example the fundamentalist pastor
farians people who worship
the great spaghetti monster they are
always at a disadvantage because
number one they're very very focused on
ensuring the purity
of their religion of pastafarianism
and because they're so focused on the
purity of being a pastafarian
they're not focused on how to get past
the security the security
of an open dynamic society and the open
dynamic society governments
are very very focused and very very
skillful and knowledgeable
in trying to prevent terrorists from
ever succeeding and they do thwart the
terrorists it's not perfect
of course now and again the terrorists
actually do win but by and large people
who are terrorists
are not all that bright they are at a
disadvantage now it's not to say that
terrorists are uneducated we know very
well sam harris speaks eloquently on the
fact that
there are a certain breed of terrorists
who are highly educated highly educated
indeed
but this is the exception rather than
the rule
usually people who become better
at their understanding of science also
become better
at their understanding of at least a
folk form of philosophy
they become better therefore in terms of
reasoning
in the moral sphere too they generally
just become
better people and less likely to be
captured
by terrible ideologies now it's not to
say it's impossible
we know of famous examples where indeed
terrorists have been among the most
educated people in society
but this will become diminishingly
unlikely
to be the case so how you calculate
something like
the chance of nuclear terrorism wiping
out humanity before 2100
this is called mathematism it's a form
of scientism really
it's just applying statistical methods
to places where
there is no business in applying them
because they cannot possibly account
for all the ways in which people would
use knowledge creation their personal
creativity in order to mitigate
the chance of this terrible thing
happening now the chance of
super intelligent ai wiping us out by
2100 they said was 5
but what is the chance of super
intelligent ai arising at all within
the next century i don't know how do
they know
we don't know anything about what it
takes to produce a super intelligent ai
so
much less the chance of super
intelligent ai
actually being an existential threat to
humanity so even if we did
whatever the chances of super
intelligent ai arising
how do we know that the super
intelligent ai is not going to
make it less likely that the super
intelligent ai
is going to wipe out humanity many there
may be there will be many such super
intelligent ais
and just like people maybe some of them
will be genocidal and want to wipe out
humanity
but maybe they'll be in the severe
minority of superintelligent allies
maybe there'll be
these other ais who are good
and who will keep in check the bad super
intelligent ais
so i don't know how we calculate the
probability of any of this happening
it seems a little absurd they say that
wars have a four percent chance of
wiping us out before 2100
but the number of wars keeps on
decreasing and certainly the number of
large-scale wars keeps on decreasing as
trade increases people realize that
everyone's boat
rises with the same tide and although at
the moment for example there is
much friction between let's say china in
the united states
it's not like china and the united
states are on the brink of nuclear
war i don't think they're anywhere near
it i think they're as far from having a
nuclear war
as any two countries have been over the
existence
of nuclear weapons i don't think the
war's about to become hot
the worst thing that the chinese can do
to their
so-called opponents over in the u.s is
to have a trade embargo
is to affect trade this is what the
chinese are doing in order to affect
the united states and people in the
united states are far more concerned
about that
and indeed people in china are far more
concerned about that too
everyone wants to make money everyone
wants to be healthier
wealthier and wiser they want to learn
more they want to make more widgets
they want things to be better for the
people that are around them
they're not so interested in taking over
more territory
modulo of course yes the chinese are
having
issues in taiwan they're having issues
in the
seas around southeast asia yes these
political
things happen but it really is nothing
like the second world war
there's nothing about china for example
that resembles
anything like germany at the beginning
of the second world war
just deciding to take over one territory
after another
china knows that the free world is
arrayed against them
when it comes to taking over land the
free world
remains far more powerful than china
there is a
huge alliance of people australia india
the united kingdom the united states
canada
europe just about all of these countries
these free democracies
are arrayed against totalitarian regimes
who might decide
to encroach upon the territory of
smaller nations
and insofar as it would get anywhere
rise to anywhere near the level of
true conflict that true conflict is
played out
diplomatically it may be played out at
worst
in terms of trade as i say sanctions
might be put on
one country or another there might be
mean things
said in the political sphere but there
does not seem to be
a path to global war
so i don't think not only is there not a
path towards global war
there's not a path towards global war
such that it would ever
wipe out humanity there's no four
percent chance
of wars wiping out civilization before
not only is this not known but of all
the explanations
about the ways in which nations interact
in the modern era
one with another the last thing any of
them want to do
is go to war no matter how much their
bellicose have no matter how much they
talk big
it is all talk it is all talk and so
it's kind of laughable that here we have
an attempt at a calculation but how
where this is this number is plucked out
of the air
now i'm just clicking on the reference
for this table
and i'm taken to another wikipedia page
the future of humanity institute
at oxford university now why should i be
unsurprised
the future of the future of humanity
institute it turns out i didn't know who
these people were
i should have guessed oxford university
its director is philosopher nick bostrom
and its research staff and associates
include
toby ord
[Laughter]
of all the people that are in charge of
this oh and here we go
the future of humanity institute the
logo is there it's a lovely diamond logo
it looks like a looks like it could be a
logo for a bank
but um it says the introduction is
sharing an office and working closely
with the center for effective altruism
the institute's stated objective is to
focus research
where it can make the greatest positive
difference
i'm sorry this is no this is very
serious this is about existential risk
can't laugh about this
but why did i should have guessed that
they're associated with the center for
effective altruism now i've written
and spoken about effective altruism
before
effective altruism is i would say
effectively socialism but
putting that aside they want to make a
positive difference for humanity in the
long term well the positive difference
they want to make of course comes out of
the deepest form of pessimism so if you
can extract
if you can extract pessimism if you can
extract extract
positivity out of pessimism well
excellent wonderful i i
i more power to them
but i think there's a better way i don't
think we need to start with
a premise about all the ways in which we
are
possibly going to die and from there
somehow figure out ways in which to well
let's be clear
control society and to come up with
solutions which no doubt are about
trying to have these philosophers the
philosopher kings
advise governments on what kind of
policies
will best redistribute wealth and
control people
because that is almost always what their
prescriptions are
now i i shouldn't make light i think
that we can come together i think that
that optimists in the david deutsch
sense or to some extent
the stephen pinker sense to some extent
the matt riley sense
so that we can indeed find common cause
here we can indeed find common cause
with
what i would regard as the most
pure pessimists that i know of in
academia the people who are
very very very fixated upon
this notion of existential risk upon the
ways in which
people are going to destroy themselves
either through creating technology so
technology is always the thing that
these people are worried about the ai is
going to
not only take our jobs it could
potentially wipe us out so that's our
actions doing things
or nuclear weapons our actions doing
things or our inaction
so for example in not doing the thing
that we need to do in time
to prevent the global catastrophe so for
example
not solving the global pandemic when it
comes
not doing sufficient things about
climate change in order to
prevent catastrophes in the economy
the prescriptions that are on offer and
we won't go through the prescriptions
this this podcast is already
far longer than what i ever intended it
to be
but the prescriptions usually do come
down to some kind of social control
and although i have had serious
disagreements with the ways in which
governments around the world have
handled the pandemic
one thing you can take away from this is
that people do
want to try and solve a problem once it
is apparent that the problem
is affecting their lives their personal
lives they are willing to do what it
takes
when the government says to lock down
they lock down there wasn't
some sort of uh civil huge civil unrest
there wasn't huge amounts of civil
unrest there were some
protests here and there and i think
that's only healthy that those sort of
things happened
and it wasn't like there was a huge
movement against
developing a vaccine quite the opposite
people worked
on making multiple vaccines faster than
it ever been done before
the lesson of this cannot go unnoticed
we do not need a stance of pessimism we
do not
need to think that the only option here
is completely upending
the global economy and free trade and
freedom
and democracy in order to go down a
totalitarian route which is what these
people typically suggest
but is instead to have more of what it
took
to do what we did which was freely
enabling researchers to come together to
come up with solutions and in this case
it was of course
a very fast production of a vaccine
where did that come from
by the way where did these vaccines come
from two places
the united states and great britain two
of the free countries in the world
even even the technological powerhouses
of asia
weren't able to do it as quickly and why
it's purely
down to freedom and the way in which
people think
or are willing to think and criticize
ideas it's not an accident
that oxford university was one of the
places that the vaccine was produced
most quickly despite the fact that
that's where nick bostrom is
i don't know i don't know if nick
bostrom might have been arguing uh if he
ever had a chance to cross
paths with one of these vaccine
researchers that they should be very
careful about producing the vaccine
after all who knows
what terrible existential threat a
vaccine could be if it wasn't
perfectly tuned to dealing with the
coronavirus maybe
the vaccine could cause all sorts of of
course there are people like this by the
way
of course there are the anti-vaxxer
people who think that uh the
cure is worse than the disease itself
or think the cure is some sort of way of
the government trying to
get into your bloodstream and silly
stuff like that so there will always be
pessimists and naysayers
the all the rest of us can do i suppose
is to remain positive
in the face of having existential risks
listed we don't need to analyze them
mathematically for the most part
what we need to do is to have a stance
not merely
of focusing on any specific problem but
of generally
creating more knowledge in all areas and
so that's why we need to
continue to fund basic science basic
research at the most fundamental level
because the deeper
our scientific understanding the more
widely
those solutions can be applied to
practical applications
okay i think that will do for today this
was uh largely
off the cuff as i say but um if you want
to read more uh simply type in
global existential risk or just
existential risk and perhaps throw nick
bostrom in there as well um he is a
serious philosopher and despite the fact
i laugh i think we
we need to laugh sometimes because
i think the topic is dealt with in a far
too
serious way when there are many things
to be concerned about particular
problems of let's say for example
local poverty uh disease
people dying too early this kind of
thing is actually going on right now all
the time
we don't need to be fixated upon how the
entire planet
all simultaneously might get wiped out
by the grey nanotechnology goo
okay until next time bye-bye